## How a user sees IPv6

The answer should be: *they don't*. In an ideal world, users would never
need to be aware of the lower layers of the protocol stack, and they
certainly should never have to see a hexadecimal number, or even be
aware that they are using IPv6. The goal of a network designer or
operator should be to make this true.

However, it's unlikely that this will always succeed. It's likely that
if a user ever does see something specific to IPv6, it's probably at the
worst possible time: when there is a fault or a system configuration
issue. That is exactly when the user is either reading on-line help
information, or in contact with a help desk. It is therefore recommended
to review any documentation you provide to users or to help desk staff
to make sure that when IPv6 is mentioned, the information is complete,
correct and up to date. It's also important that configuration tools are
designed to avoid or minimize any need for users to enter IPv6 addresses
by hand.

This is for testing the fixes made on July 18th, 2023 and thereby
testing the use of mdformat or whatever it's called. Also some
references to \[[RFC1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1)\],
\[[BCP3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp3)\], and
\[[STD3](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/std3)\] and
\[[draft-ietf-6man-rfc6874bis](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-6man-rfc6874bis/)\].
And some broken references to
\[[RFC9999](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9999)\],
\[[STD7878](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/std7878)\] and
\[[BCP2738](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp2738)\].

### [<ins>Previous</ins>](How%20to%20use%20this%20book.md) [<ins>Next</ins>](How%20an%20application%20programmer%20sees%20IPv6.md) [<ins>Chapter Contents</ins>](1.%20Introduction%20and%20Foreword.md)
