## Topology obfuscation

There are various operational contexts in which an operator needs to
obfuscate or otherwise hide a network's topology, equipment, and hosts
from outsiders. Since IPv6 promotes end-to-end addressing, the question
arises of how to achieve topology hiding or obfuscation in the absence
of network address translation (NAT).

One important context for this is networks that must conform to
standards such as Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard
Requirements (PCI-DSS), issued by the
[PCI Security Standards Council](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org).
(This standard can be
[downloaded](https://docs-prv.pcisecuritystandards.org/PCI%20DSS/Standard/PCI-DSS-v4_0.pdf)
free of charge, but beware that you must agree to a license in order to
do so.) PCI-DSS requires an enterprise that stores certain types of
customer data to do so on servers that are effectively isolated from the
Internet and undiscoverable from outside the enterprise. Yet these
systems might also be offering Web services to clients anywhere in the
Internet. A common solution to this dilemma for IPv4 has two parts:

1. A "demilitarized zone" (DMZ) between the Internet and the core of the
   enterprise network.

1. When a server in the core communicates with a client elsewhere in the
   Internet, the requirement to hide the server is commonly satisfied by
   IPv4 NAT between the server and the DMZ.

It goes without saying that such traffic will flow through a firewall
(which PCI-DSS refers to as a Network Security Device or NSD). The
question is how should such a system obscure the server's regular IPv6
address as effectively as NAT obscures its IPv4 address. Note that
PCI-DSS (version 4, March 2022) does not require NAT, although it is
mentioned as a solution for IPv4. For IPv6, it suggests using temporary
addresses \[[RFC8981](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8981)\] for
outgoing sessions (although it cites an obsoleted RFC). Placing system
components behind proxy servers is also suggested, and it seems probable
that large installations will do this anyway to support load balancing
\[[RFC7098](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7098)\]. Proxy servers
and load balancers will intrinsically hide the core topology from
attackers.

Other aspects of topology hiding were discussed in
[RFC 4864](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4864), but that document
is significantly out of date.

Another common architectural scenario entails dis-aggregating a GUA
allocation, typically an RIR provided address block, and announcing only
the part of the assignment requiring public access, leaving the prefix
requiring obfuscation unannounced within the global DFZ (default free
zone). This model allows for a similar level of topology obscurement
without the added configuration complexity and potentially inconsistent
behavior of ULA or address translation. It should be noted, however,
that while this design model does reduce complexity at the host and
network layer, it may add minor routing complexity at the border and
incur risk of unintentionally leaking the GUA prefix that has been
earmarked for local-only use. In the latter case, use of a "belt and
suspenders" implementation of creating route policy in addition to
access control lists preventing prefix use is frequently employed.

<!-- Link lines generated automatically; do not delete -->

### [<ins>Previous</ins>](Filtering.md) [<ins>Next</ins>](../05.%20Network%20Design/05.%20Network%20Design.md) [<ins>Top</ins>](04.%20Security.md)
